Self-Determination Theory
SDT is an approach to human motivation and personality
that uses traditional empirical methods while employing an
organismic metatheory that highlights the importance of
humans' evolved inner resources for personality development and behavioral self-regulation (Ryan, Kuhl, & Deci,
1997). Thus, its arena is the investigation of people's
inherent growth tendencies and innate psychological needs
that are the basis for their self-motivation and personality
integration, as well as for the conditions that foster those
positive processes. Inductively, using the empirical process, we have identified three such needs--the needs for
competence (Harter, 1978; White, 1963), relatedness
(Baumeister & Leary, 1995; Reis, 1994), and autonomy
(deCharms, 1968; Deci, 1975)--that appear to be essential
for facilitating optimal functioning of the natural propensities for growth and integration, as well as for constructive
social development and personal well-being.
This work was supported in part by research Grant MH-53385 from the
National Institute of Mental Health. We thank all of the members of the
Human Motivation Research Group at the University of Rochester who
have contributed to these ideas and research, and to Jennifer LaGuardia,
Charles Couchman, and Phyllis Joe for their specific help with this article.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to either
Richard M. Ryan or Edward L. Deci, Department of Clinical and Social
Sciences in Psychology, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14627.
Electronic mail may be sent to either ryan@psych.rochester.edu or
deci@psych.rochester.edu.
68 January 2000 • American Psychologist
Copyright 2000 by the American Psychological Association, Inc. 0003-066X/00/$5.00
Vol. 55, No. 1, 68-78 DOI: 10.1037110003-066X.55.1.68
Richard M.
Ryan
Photo by Joe Gawlowicz,
University of Rochester
Much of the research guided by SDT has also examined environmental factors that hinder or undermine selfmotivation, social functioning, and personal well-being.
Although many specific deleterious effects have been explored, the research suggests that these detriments can be
most parsimoniously described in terms of thwarting the
three basic psychological needs. Thus, SDT is concerned
not only with the specific nature of positive developmental
tendencies, but it also examines social environments that
are antagonistic toward these tendencies.
The empirical methods used in much of the SDT
research have been in the Baconian tradition, in that social
contextual variables have been directly manipulated to
examine their effects on both internal processes and behavioral manifestations. The use of experimental paradigms
has allowed us to specify the conditions under which people's natural activity and constructiveness will flourish, as
well as those that promote a lack of self-motivation and
social integration. In this way, we have used experimental
methods without accepting the mechanistic or efficient
causal meta-theories that have typically been associated
with those methods.
In this article we review work guided by SDT, addressing its implications for three important outcomes. We
begin with an examination of intrinsic motivation, the
prototypic manifestation of the human tendency toward
learning and creativity, and we consider research specifying conditions that facilitate versus forestall this special
type of motivation. Second, we present an analysis of
self-regulation, which concerns how people take in social
values and extrinsic contingencies and progressively transform them into personal values and self-motivations. In
that discussion, we outline different forms of internalized
motivation, addressing their behavioral and experiential
correlates and the conditions that ale likely to promote
these different motivations. Third, we focus on studies that
have directly examined the impact of psychological need
fulfillment on health and well-being.
The Nature of Motivation
Motivation concerns energy, direction, persistence and
equifinality--all aspects of activation and intention. Motivation has been a central and perennial issue in the field of
psychology, for it is at the core of biological, cognitive, and
social regulation. Perhaps more important, in the real
world, motivation is highly valued because of its consequences: Motivation produces. It is therefore of preeminent
concern to those in roles such as manager, teacher, religious leader, coach, health care provider, and parent that
involve mobilizing others to act.
Although motivation is often treated as a singular
construct, even superficial reflection suggests that people
are moved to act by very different types of factors, with
highly varied experiences and consequences. People can be
motivated because they value an activity or because there is
strong external coercion. They can be urged into action by
an abiding interest or by a bribe. They can behave from a
sense of personal commitment to excel or from fear of
being surveilled. These contrasts between cases of having
internal motivation versus being externally pressured are
surely familiar to everyone. The issue of whether people
stand behind a behavior out of their interests and values, or
do it for reasons external to the self, is a matter of significance in every culture (e.g., Johnson, 1993) and represents
a basic dimension by which people make sense of their own
and others' behavior (deCharms, 1968; Heider, 1958; Ryan
& Connell, 1989).
Comparisons between people whose motivation is authentic (literally, self-authored or endorsed) and those who
are merely externally controlled for an action typically
reveal that the former, relative to the latter, have more
interest, excitement, and confidence, which in turn is manifest both as enhanced performance, persistence, and creativity (Deci & Ryan, 1991; Sheldon, Ryan, Rawsthorne, &
Ilardi, 1997) and as heightened vitality (Nix, Ryan, Manly,
& Deci, 1999), self-esteem (Deci & Ryan, 1995), and
general well-being (Ryan, Deci, & Grolnick, 1995). This is
so even when the people have the same level of perceived
competence or self-efficacy for the activity.
Because of the functional and experiential differences
between self-motivation and external regulation, a major
focus of SDT has been to supply a more differentiated
approach to motivation, by asking what kind of motivation
is being exhibited at any given time. By considering the
perceived forces that move a person to act, SDT has been
able to identify several distinct types of motivation, each of
which has specifiable consequences for learning, performance, personal experience, and well-being. Also, by articulating a set of principles concerning how each type of
motivation is developed and sustained, or forestalled and
undermined, SDT at once recognizes a positive thrust to
human nature and provides an account of passivity, alienation, and psychopathology.
January 2000 • American Psychologist 69
Edward L.
Deci
Photo by Joe Gawlowicz, University of Rochester
Intrinsic Motivation
Perhaps no single phenomenon reflects the positive potential of human nature as much as intrinsic motivation, the
inherent tendency to seek out novelty and challenges, to
extend and exercise one's capacities, to explore, and to
learn. Developmentalists acknowledge that from the time
of birth, children, in their healthiest states, are active,
inquisitive, curious, and playful, even in the absence of
specific rewards (e.g., Harter, 1978). The construct of intrinsic motivation describes this natural inclination toward
assimilation, mastery, spontaneous interest, and exploration that is so essential to cognitive and social development
and that represents a principal source of enjoyment and
vitality throughout life (Csikszentmihalyi & Rathunde,
1993; Ryan, 1995).
Yet, despite the fact that humans are liberally endowed with intrinsic motivational tendencies, the evidence
is now clear that the maintenance and enhancement of this
inherent propensity requires supportive conditions, as it can
be fairly readily disrupted by various nonsupportive conditions. Thus, our theory of intrinsic motivation does not
concern what causes intrinsic motivation (which we view
as an evolved propensity; Ryan et al., 1997); rather, it
examines the conditions that elicit and sustain, versus subdue and diminish, this innate propensity.
Cognitive evaluation theory (CET) was presented by
Deci and Ryan (1985) as a subtheory within SDT that had
the aim of specifying factors that explain variability in
intrinsic motivation. CET is framed in terms of social and
environmental factors that facilitate versus undermine intrinsic motivation, using language that reflects the assumption that intrinsic motivation, being inherent, will be catalyzed when individuals are in conditions that conduce
toward its expression. In other words, it will flourish if
circumstances permit. Put in this way, the study of conditions that facilitate versus undermine intrinsic motivation is
an important first step in understanding sources of both
alienation and liberation of the positive aspects of human
nature.
CET, which focuses on the fundamental needs for
competence and autonomy, was formulated to integrate
results from initial laboratory experiments on the effects of
rewards, feedback, and other external events on intrinsic
motivation, and was subsequently tested and extended by
field studies in various settings. The theory argues, first,
that social-contextual events (e.g., feedback, communications, rewards) that conduce toward feelings of competence
during action can enhance intrinsic motivation for that
action. Accordingly, optimal challenges, effectance-prorooting feedback, and freedom from demeaning evaluations
were all found to facilitate intrinsic motivation. For example, early studies showed that positive performance feedback enhanced intrinsic motivation, whereas negative performance feedback diminished it (Deci, 1975), and research by Vallerand and Reid (1984) showed that these
effects were mediated by perceived competence.
CET further specifies, and studies have shown (Fisher,
1978; Ryan, 1982), that feelings of competence will not
enhance intrinsic motivation unless accompanied by a
sense of autonomy or, in attributional terms, by an internal
perceived locus of causality (deCharms, 1968). Thus, according to CET, people must not only experience competence or efficacy, they must also experience their behavior
as self-determined for intrinsic motivation to be in evidence. This requires either immediate contextual supports for autonomy and competence or abiding inner resources (Reeve, 1996) that are typically the result of prior
developmental supports for perceived autonomy and
competence.
In fact, most of the research on the effects of environmental events in intrinsic motivation has focused on the
issue of autonomy versus control rather than that of competence. Research on this issue has been considerably more
controversial. It began with the repeated demonstration that
extrinsic rewards can undermine intrinsic motivation. Deci
(1975) interpreted these results in terms of rewards facilitating a more external perceived locus of causality (i.e.,
diminished autonomy). Although the issue of reward effects has been hotly debated, a recent, comprehensive
meta-analysis (Deci, Koestner, & Ryan, 1999) confirmed,
in spite of claims to the contrary by Eisenberger and
Cameron (1996), that all expected tangible rewards made
contingent on task performance do reliably undermine intrinsic motivation.
Also, research revealed that not only tangible rewards
but also threats, deadlines, directives, pressured evaluations, and imposed goals diminish intrinsic motivation because, like tangible rewards, they conduce toward an external perceived locus of causality. In contrast, choice,
acknowledgment of feelings, and opportunities for selfdirection were found to enhance intrinsic motivation because they allow people a greater feeling of autonomy
(Deci & Ryan, 1985). Field studies have further shown that
70 January 2000 • American Psychologist
teachers who are autonomy supportive (in contrast to controlling) catalyze in their students greater intrinsic motivation, curiosity, and desire for challenge (e.g., Deci, Nezlek,
& Sheinman, 1981; Flink, Boggiano, & Barrett, 1990;
Ryan & Grolnick, 1986). Students taught with a more
controlling approach not only lose initiative but learn less
effectively, especially when learning requires conceptual,
creative processing (Amabile, 1996; Grolnick & Ryan,
1987; Utman, 1997). Similarly, studies showed that autonomy-supportive parents, relative to controlling parents,
have children who are more intrinsically motivated
(Grolnick, Deci, & Ryan, 1997). Such findings generalized
to other domains such as sport and music in which supports
for autonomy and competence by parents and mentors
incite more intrinsic motivation (e.g., Frederick & Ryan,
1995).
Although autonomy and competence supports are
highly salient for producing variability in intrinsic motivation, a third factor, relatedness, also bears on its expression.
In infancy, intrinsic motivation is readily observable as
exploratory behavior and, as suggested by attachment theorists (e.g., Bowlby, 1979), it is more evident when the
infant is securely attached to a parent. Studies of mothers
and infants have, indeed, shown that both security and
maternal autonomy support predict more exploratory behavior in the infants (e.g., Frodi, Bridges, & Grolnick,
1985). SDT hypothesizes that a similar dynamic occurs in
interpersonal settings over the life span, with intrinsic
motivation more likely to flourish in contexts characterized
by a sense of security and relatedness. For example, Anderson, Manoogian, and Reznick (1976) found that when
children worked on an interesting task in the presence of an
adult stranger who ignored them and failed to respond to
their initiations, a very low level of intrinsic motivation
resulted, and Ryan and Grolnick (1986) observed lower
intrinsic motivation in students who experienced their
teachers as cold and uncaring. Of course, many intrinsically
motivated behaviors are happily performed in isolation,
suggesting that proximal relational supports may not be
necessary for intrinsic motivation, but a secure relational
base does seem to be important for the expression of
intrinsic motivation to be in evidence.
To summarize, the CET framework suggests that social environments can facilitate or forestall intrinsic motivation by supporting versus thwarting people's innate psychological needs. Strong links between intrinsic motivation
and satisfaction of the needs for autonomy and competence
have been clearly demonstrated, and some work suggests
that satisfaction of the need for relatedness, at least in a
distal sense, may also be important for intrinsic motivation.
It is critical to remember, however, that people will be
intrinsically motivated only for activities that hold intrinsic
interest for them, activities that have the appeal of novelty,
challenge, or aesthetic value. For activities that do not hold
such appeal, the principles of CET do not apply, because
the activities will not be experienced as intrinsically motivated to begin with. To understand the motivation for those
activities, we need to look more deeply into the nature and
dynamics of extrinsic motivation.